[דובר 1] (0:13 - 4:43)
Well, I think this same term religion leads us to error. We use this word religion as if to name something different, as if to name a phenomenon in human discourse. And there really is a range of obsessions and practices that bear the name of religion.

And, therefore, many points of this continuum do not have much in common with others. So, if you take a religion like Jainism, the religion of India, its fundamental principle is non-violence. I mean, this is where Gandhi got his conception of non-violence.

The Hans are vegetarians. They do not have a doctrine of holy war. In fact, they do not even have an adequate doctrine of self-defense.

I mean, they are pacifists. They do not want to kill a fly. And then, at the other end of the continuum, you have something like Islam, which explicitly has a doctrine of holy war and a notion of combat and death in certain contexts, which is actually the highest obligation that a religious person can fulfill.

So, these are both religions. You know, religion is a word like sport. You know, you have a sport like boxing and you have a sport like boxing.

They are not both sports. One is much more dangerous. So it worries me.

Obviously, I am more concerned about religions like Islam, in which you have this combination of a variety of spiritual and ethical concerns, but also certain types of metaphysical certainties that inspire people not only to die, but to kill others in the process. And that does not happen in other religions. So I think we have to be clear about how this term religion can lead us to error.

I consider that religions are essentially failed sciences. I mean, religion was the discourse we had when all the causes of the universe were opaque. We did not know, we did not know the basis of anything.

We did not know why we were here. We did not know how diseases spread or what diseases were. We did not know how people died prematurely and why others prospered.

We do not know what is causing electric storms to make crops go bad. And very naturally, as a cognitive and behavioral imperative, we form descriptions of the world and try to find out what is happening. We tell stories about our origins, about where we are going and about the causes of the world.

And those stories are given to our generalized ignorance and our willingness to see the agency in the world, to see, you know, to feel ourselves in relation to the world. These stories imply being in a relationship with invisible friends, you know, and enemies. And we have, you know, this paternal figure in this type that will take care of things if you live correctly.

And we have other demonic presences that we should be very concerned about. And little by little, what you see is happening is that religion, such as rationality, and dozens of specific sciences were born in human conversation. You see religion on 100 fronts losing the discussion with science.

I mean, we see that, you know, on the front of health and human disease, religion used to allow you to obtain a diagnostic of demonic possession. I mean, it was reasonable to believe that you had, if you were having seizures, for example, but now we have a neuroscience science and we know about epilepsy. And then, when your child has seizures, you know, you do not go to church to be diagnosed and treated by exorcism.

And that's a good thing. What I say is that religion is losing the discussion on all the other fronts. It is losing the discussion ethically and it will lose the discussion spiritually.

I mean, we will understand the spiritual experience very well, at some point, at the level of the brain and at the level of the way in which the use of attention in certain ways can change the human experience. We will understand it in a way that will make this type of confessional religion speak of Jesus and grace or Buddha and magical powers a mockery. And that will be overthrown in the same way that it has been overthrown in medicine.

It is a process, I think, we just have to be honest about it and let it develop.