[דובר 1] (0:03 - 4:34)
In science, it is all about finding specific answers to questions about the functioning of nature. This is a very important process, which is actually quite reliable Hypotheses are set up, which are tested based on data and conclusions are drawn, which are checked over and over again to ensure that they are correct. So if you want to answer questions about the functioning of nature, e.g. biology, science is the right way. Scientists believe in this, and they are very concerned about the assumption that there are also other approaches to derive truths about nature. And I think some see faith as a threat to the scientific method and as one that must be refuted. But faith, if you look at it correctly, actually asks other questions.

That's why I don't believe that there must be a God, with whom faith can help to answer them, are more in the philosophical area. Why are we all here? Why is there something and not nothing?

Is there a God? Isn't it clear that these are not scientific questions and that science doesn't have much to say about it? But you either have to say that these are inappropriate questions and we cannot discuss them, or you have to say that we need something besides science to pursue the things that interest humanity.

For me it makes absolute sense. But I think for many scientists, especially for those who have seen the shrill allusions of extreme views that threaten their scientific activities and therefore have the feeling that they cannot really integrate these thoughts into their own worldview, faith can be seen as an enemy. And similarly, on the other hand, some of my scientific colleagues who are of atheistic conviction sometimes use science as a club over the heads of the believers to basically claim that everything that cannot be reduced to a scientific question is unimportant and only represents faith that should be eliminated.

Part of the problem, in my opinion, is that the extremists took over the stage. Eh, these voices are the ones we hear. I think most people actually have no problem with the idea that science is a part of the whole story.

And there is also a place for religion, for faith, for theology, for philosophy. Eh, but this harmony perspective doesn't get that much attention. Nobody is as interested in harmony as in conflicts.

I'm afraid. My genetic studies tell me without a doubt that Darwin was right with his assessment of how living beings, due to the origin of a common ancestor under the influence of natural selection, have reached the end of their lives. Darwin was amazingly sharp-minded when he considered how limited the molecular information he had was.

Basically, there was none. Now we have the best possible proof for Darwin's theory with the digital code of DNA that he could have imagined. So that certainly tells me something about the nature of living beings.

But it strengthens my feeling that this is the answer to a question about the possibility of an intelligence behind all this. Why, for example, do the constants that determine the behavior of matter and energy, such as the gravitational constant, have exactly the value they need so that there can be any complexity in the That's pretty breathtaking because it's so unlikely that something like that could have been involved in the creation of the conditions. At the same time, that doesn't necessarily mean that this spirit controls the specific manipulations of things that take place in the natural world.

In fact, I would strongly oppose this idea. I think the laws of nature could potentially be the product of a spirit. I think that's a reasonable view, but once these laws exist, I think that nature continues to move and science has the opportunity to recognize how this works and what consequences it has.